How Does Climate Change Affect the Brain?
	Almost every day, headlines of climate change inundate the news: wildfires, earthquakes, landslides, and more take over the Internet. Most recently, countless videos and news articles were published of the floods in San Diego County, historically drenching cities in rainwater and turning freeways into wide and fast-flowing rivers. Climate in the United States is changing quickly, and is noticeably becoming more dangerous to its residents. Consequently,  environmental factors can affect the development and plasticity of the brain. Extreme weather events, for example, have been found to cause a change in behavior and downward shift in academic success. People with existing neurological conditions, as well as other vulnerable groups, such as children, the elderly, and impoverished, are also usually severely impacted by climate change. Observing the impact people have on climate change, it becomes evident that they are not only negatively influencing the environment, but they are indirectly affecting their own lives through their physical health (Vennells). It is imperative to recognize that people and climate are intertwined, and the actions people mindlessly take may have harmful repercussions to their brain.
	Extreme weather events, such as heatwaves, droughts, hurricanes, forest fires, and more, can negatively impact brain structure and function. According to a journal on Oxford Academic, the brain requires proper nutrients and to be within a “narrow [range] of physical parameters” for it to function optimally (Sisodiya 1731). If the brain does not meet its required conditions, its function may become compromised. Some examples of conditions that may cause the brain to fall outside of safe conditions for a person’s well-being include hypoxia (a condition when tissues fail to receive enough oxygen and the body struggles to maintain homeostasis), alcohol or drug poisoning, and disrupted sleep. Psychological trauma and pre-existing diseases can also cause people’s brains to fail to function to their full potential. These conditions can cause an individual to become less resilient, making it harder for them to cope with change and recover after a tough challenge (Vennells, Sisodiya 1731). 
	Extreme temperatures can also severely impact the brain. Coupled with natural disasters caused by climate change, this can be very detrimental to people’s well-being and behavior. Nancy Sicotte, MD, chair of the Department of Neurology at Cedars-Sinai, a medical hospital located in Los Angeles, California, states, “Clearly, there’s an optimum temperature at which the brain and body work best, and if the temperature gets too hot, productivity goes down because our brains and bodies can’t function at top-notch speed” (Sicotte). Thus, climate change can adversely impact human behavior, particularly productivity, when temperatures rise globally. According to Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, numerous studies support the idea that hotter temperatures may cause students to perform less well in school. For instance, a report in 2023 notes that climate-driven heat has been correlated with a 4-7% decline in academic achievement in the United States every year. Academic achievement is clearly slumping as temperatures continue to rise, but is this correlation happening coincidentally? Another study by Harvard Kennedy School examined the test scores of millions of American high school students. Interestingly, students tended to score lower after experiencing a hot school year compared to a cooler one. This study also found that low-income and minority students tended to be more impacted by heat than others, which shows that climate change disproportionately affects some groups more than others. An exception was schools that used air conditioning, which eliminated the impact of warm air. An observational study of young adults in Massachusetts found a similar impact involving the presence of air conditioning. In this study, 44 students were observed for 12 days in July 2016. Each day, participants had to self-administer the Stroop color-word test to measure attention and processing speed. The students also had to take a 2-digit addition/ subtraction test, which measures cognitive agility and memory. Like the studies discussed earlier, students in this study were found to have lower test scores when no air conditioning was present. They also had a significantly slower reaction time in both the Stroop color-word and addition/ subtraction exams (Vennells, “The Brain and Climate Change”, “Brain Development”). Thus, it is evident that climate change not only causes rising temperatures that influence a decline in cognitive ability, but it also may disproportionately affect those without access to air conditioning, such as the impoverished who cannot afford it. 
	In fact, some communities are unfairly impacted by climate change more than others. Those below the poverty line, for example, are more likely to be exposed to toxins and receive inadequate nutrition. The poor are also more likely to have heightened childhood stress and a lack of cognitive stimulation if they did not receive the opportunity to go to school. These factors may multiply when climate change impacts their neighborhood. For example, if a school shuts down due to a storm, students are more likely to continue learning if they have stable Internet access. The children and elderly are susceptible to influence from climate change as well since they have a harder time regulating their body. A 2019 report from the International Labour Organization took a closer look at how heat stress impacts labor and economic productivity. It notes that increased heat stress and extreme weather leads to a reduction in working hours, which causes construction workers and farmers to work less and receive less income (Vennells, “The Brain and Climate Change”). 
	In particular, people with pre-existing neurological diseases and conditions are likely to be impacted by climate change. To maintain homeostasis, people need to be able to adjust to temperatures that suddenly shift. However, when a person’s brain is not fully functional, their ability to adjust to rising temperatures induced by climate change can be impeded. One such neurological disease that may hinder one’s ability to acclimate to a warmer climate is Dravet Syndrome, a dangerous epilepsy syndrome resulting from a mutant in the gene SCN1A that encodes the channel Nav1.1. Dravet Syndrome is a channelopathy, a disease caused by defects in ion channels, where fevers and high ambient temperatures may induce seizures. People diagnosed with Dravet Syndrome may have thermoregulatory dysfunction and a loss of mobility, which results in an inability to effectively manage heat loss. Because people with Dravet Syndrome may not realize when the temperature is rising, they may fail to react to or communicate overheating. This results in a positive feedback loop, once again, raising brain and body temperatures and causing further abnormalities in the SCN1A gene.
The consequences of this syndrome are severe. Under this medical condition, patients cannot sleep properly or voice their discomfort. If they have not drunk enough water, they may be subject to more seizures. As more people struggle when temperatures go up, there is an increased demand for ambulances. Worst case, a lower supply of ambulances means longer delays and wait times outside the emergency room. If the ambulance is very hot, the patient may become prone to even more seizures. The Dravet Syndrome is just one of the many neurological diseases that are heavily affected by climate change. People with other channelopathies, spinal cord injuries, dementia, stroke, and other neurological conditions may also be affected (Sisodiya 1732).
 Another example of a serious neurological condition impacted by climate change is multiple sclerosis, a chronic disease that affects the central nervous system. In multiple sclerosis (MS), “a patient’s own immune cells attack the myelin sheaths that protect the nerve cells,” as defined by Cedars-Sinai Medical Center (“The Brain and Climate Change”). Nancy Sicotte, MD, remarks that there is a very strong correlation between worsening symptoms of multiple sclerosis and heat. This is an example of Uthoff’s phenomenon happening: when patients with certain neurological diseases experience heightened symptoms when their body temperature rises, whether it is due to exercise, the outdoor temperature, or a fever. Cedars-Sinai Medical Center comments that patients afflicted by Uthoff’s phenomenon may struggle with muscle weakness, a numbing feeling in the limbs, or potentially loss of sight. The problem of climate change affecting the brain is urgent. 
As planet Earth rises in temperature, patients affected by multiple sclerosis experience more hot days, which can be agonizing for them. “I have patients who will go on vacation to a cold place like Alaska and feel amazing,” Sicotte reflects. “But it would be very disruptive if patients had to change where they live because of MS” (Sicotte). In other words, patients affected by multiple sclerosis often do not fully feel comfortable at home because for them, consistently warmer weather causes them to be consistently under the weather. They continuously experience worsened symptoms unless they travel somewhere cold and oftentimes, it is not feasible to simply change where they live, especially if the patient has a serious neurological disease (“The Brain and Climate Change”). If climate change worsens and more extreme weather, such as hurricanes, occurs, patients may struggle even more to access treatment they need immediately. 
Climate change is harming human health, but it is people who cause the increase of carbon pollution through their own actions – driving carbon-emitting vehicles, for instance. To combat this, we can educate others about environmental justice, and how some people are more predisposed to the burdens of climate change if they are in poverty, are very young or elderly, or currently have a neurological condition. We can plant trees to release more fresh oxygen and improve the air quality around our local neighborhood. We can walk, bike, or take public transit to contribute to our role in reducing the human population’s carbon footprint. Lastly, as the environmental adage says, we can reuse, reduce, and recycle to minimize unnecessary waste and maximize the use of what we currently have (“Brain Development”). As for people with medical conditions, like multiple sclerosis, patients can now take cooling baths and wear cooling scarves to help deal with rising global temperatures (“Brain and Climate Change”). But for a long-term solution, people need to take action. 
Climate change is an issue that needs to be addressed now. Climate change may have some serious ramifications on the human body and brain, but many of those consequences are indirect results of our own actions. According to Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, burning fossil fuels, such as through cars and power plants, releases carbon pollution that can be detrimental to developing brains. A study centralized in Massachusetts observed children living within 50 meters of a major roadway. Major roadways tend to be highly congested, resulting in surrounding areas having a higher concentration of unsafe particles in the air. Unsurprisingly, these children tended to have a lower IQ and worse hand-eye coordination. A similar study conducted between 9-11 and 18-20 year-olds in Los Angeles, California, demonstrated that individuals within these age groups also tended to have a lower IQ if they resided in areas with a higher density of particulate matter (“Brain Development”). We are intertwined with the environment; remember, the environment may harm human health, but humans are also damaging the health of the environment. We have the power to adjust how we treat our outdoor home. As Sicotte states, “I think ultimately the health of individuals is tied to the health of the planet. And the planet is not so healthy”. 

Works Cited
“The Brain and Climate Change: Cedars-Sinai.” Cedars, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 27 Feb. 2020, www.cedars-sinai.org/newsroom/the-brain-and-climate-change/. Accessed 30 Jan. 2024. 
“Brain Development.” C-CHANGE | Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, The President and Fellows of Harvard College, 25 Apr. 2023, www.hsph.harvard.edu/c-change/subtopics/climate-change-and-a-childs-brain/. Accessed 30 Jan. 2024. 
Sisodiya, Sanjay M. “Climate Change and the Brain.” Brain, vol. 146, no. 5, 8 Mar. 2023, pp. 1731–1733, doi:10.1093/brain/awad076. 
Vennells, Louise. “Warming World, Changing Minds: Climate’s Effect on the Brain.” Neuroscience News, 13 Nov. 2023, neurosciencenews.com/climate-change-brain-25206/#:~:text=Summary%3A%20A%20new%20study%20highlights,brain%20structure%20and%20cognitive%20abilities. Accessed 30 Jan. 2024. 